---
title: 'What is Linux?'
author: TheFake VIP
editor: TheFakeVIP
date: 2018-04-01T0:00:06+01:00
lastmod: 2020-04-15T21:45:06+01:00
draft: false
categories:
  - Operating Systems
---

If you're new round here, you're probably asking, at almost every page
you visit, "What in the actual world is linux?" In this article, I hope
to shed some light on Linux, its community and its philosophy.

<!--more-->

To explain what linux is, you need to know what an operating system is.

## Operating Systems

An operating system is essentially a piece of software, a program, that
runs and manages your computer. In its simplest form, it displays stuff
on the screen, allows you to control what is going on by smashing that
board of keys in front of you and is responsible for all those blue
screens of death we got in the 90s. But seriously, an OS handles
almost any task that you use a computer for. Often programs can be
loaded onto an operating system (they can be installed) to extend its
functionality.

There are many thousands of operating systems out there, the most common
of which are Microsoft's windows OS that has the largest marketshare and
Apple's macOS, which comes on any apple computer you buy. Linux is one
of these;

## And So Much More!

Linux isn't **just** an operating system. Technically speaking,
**Linux** on its own is just an OS **kernel** (I.E. the core
of the operating system that allows the applications and environment
**you** interact with to talk to the computer hardware). It on its own
does not include any applications.

### The GNU Coreutils

One of the reasons people love to get into ... discussions ... about
what to call Linux is due to the fantastic work of [the Free Software
Foundation](https://fsf.org). They, along with many, many others of
course, created most of the tools that are usually bundled with a
[distribution]({{< relref "#distributions" >}}) of Linux. Some
people, me included, believe that they deserve as much credit as the
creators and maintainers of Linux get (they did after all turn the Linux
kernel into a useful, complete operating system. However, others, me
also included, feel that GNU / Linux is too long to type (plus it
includes a '/' character, which may not be allowed in certain
circumstances) and use Linux as a shorthand.

One of the best and worst parts of the Linux ecosystem is how modular
and configurable it is. Unlike other OSSes, Linux is composed of many
different parts from many different projects, maintainers and
communities. Often, multiple implementations of a particular feature or
service exist, each with its own idea of how things should work. This
allows for an unpresidented level of modularity, however, it also
fragments the Linux community, leading to those lengthy debates on
[r/linux](https://reddit.com/r/linux) and other places that, at times,
can get quite acidic (if you haven't seen them yet, you'll grow to
ignore them and focus on what actually matters after a while).

Dispite its downsides, I personally believe Linux and its satalites is
the future. Why? ...

### The Concept of Opensource

While typical operating systems are made in house at some company, the
linux OS is open to the public. So what does this mean? Essentially,
anybody with the knowledge can **contribute** to a project (E.G. the
Linux kernel itself). This allows a community to form around it, with
each person scratching their own particular itch and improving the OS as
a whole. So in many less words, open source means that the code
(**source**) is out in the **open** for anyone to contribute to, audit
and improve.

### Open Source Downsides

Yes. As much as I don't want them to exist, this open model has its
flaws. For example, if anyone can look at the code, anyone can find a
security flaw. And while security researchers are constantly doing this
to fix these holes, some people aren't as nice and will take advantage
of this opertunity. I believe with enough community support that this
can be overcome (in fact it allready has, as common consensus suggests
Linux is **more secure** than other OSses), but it's a matter of opinion
at this point.

## Distributions

So, now you know what linux is. But what is [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com)
then? Or [Debian](https://debian.org), [Arch](https://archlinux.org),
[Linux Mint](https://linuxmint.com)? These are called distributions
**(distros)**. They're essentially the Linux kernel bundled with tools
to make it useful. What tools are bundled, how they're installed and
managed, is all up to the distro maintainers to decide. Since the code
is out in the open, anyone is free to create their own version of linux
with their own tools and way of doing things. Consequently, distros can
be **based** off of other distros, so Ubuntu for example is based off of
the code created by Debian. All of this comes together to create a very
flexible structure (you choose the distro that best suits your needs, or
if you're feeling adventurous, you create your own).

## Privacy

It seems that in the modern digital age, we have no choice but to accept
the fact that everything about us will be sent off to some of the
richest companies on the plannet, to be mined, tracked and highly
analysed, all to sell ads. But this just isn't true! Because of its
strong philosophy of **freedom,** both in a monitary and choice sense,
you won't find built-in spyware in Linux. What's more, while companies
like Apple **say** that they are privacy respecting, with a Linux distro,
they are forced by the license of the code to publish all source code
used in the final product. If a piece of spyware was to be found in a
Linux distribution, the public would immediately know and someone would
likely **fork** the project (take the code, rebrand and rerelease it)
with the spying code removed, completely shutting down the original
distro as the fork offers the same features, but no spying.

---

And that's linux. I wrote this specifically to give blind and visually
impaired people a hint as to what I talk about alot on this site, so that
they can make sense of it for themselves and choose which OS they want
to use.

Thanks for reading!
